Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Dr. Melissa
Chu. She's associate director of Teaching Excellence at Marquette
University, where she's also the faculty director of their
executive MBA program. And in our first conversation together
with Dr. Kimberly Garcher, we talked about their book
Philosophy for Girls. I will be leaving the link
to it in the description, and today we're going
to talk about women and intellectual joy. So Dr.
Xu, welcome back to the show. It's always a
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you so much for having me, not once
but twice.
Yeah, and I hope 3 times or even more.
So let's
see. Sounds good to
me. OK, so I mean, before we get into
the main topic here, which is women and intellectual
joy, to pick on something that we we actually
touched on a little bit in our first conversation.
What do we know about discrimination and bias against
women in academia?
So, thank you for that question. Excuse me. As
a lifelong academic myself at this point, I'm, of
course, naturally inclined to be interested in issues occurring
in academia. And I will say that there are
a lot of people doing great work on gender-related
issues in academia. So, The state of things is,
as you might imagine, not great. There's the appearance
that things are getting better all the time in
academia, and in reality, they're not, even though women
are earning over half of PhDs across disciplines these
days. We still don't see gender equity reflected in,
uh, positions of leadership. And coming out of COVID,
we actually see that research productivity is down even
more than it was in terms of the difference
between men and women researching. So research productivity is
down an additional 7% for women in relation to
their male counterparts post-COVID, and that's research coming out
of 2023. We also see an increase in invisible
labor for emerging women leaders in higher education. This
is a point of, I think, acute frustration for
many women in academia, and I'd say for, uh,
the organizations in which they find themselves employed because
this invisible labor is crucial to help. Uh, UNIVERSITY
run, and yet, it doesn't seem to be valued
in terms of pay, access to leadership, and so
on. So, we have some research studies coming out
of 2023, 2023, showing that invisible labor has, in
fact, increased for women academics. And we can imagine
how this is the case as Universities have to
be leaner and operate more with less in our
times. This labor gets taken on by a lot
of faculty who aren't necessarily accustomed to doing that
sort of labor. Additionally, could you,
could you give us examples of invisible labor for
people who might not be familiar with it?
Absolutely. So invisible labor. Refers to work that is
unseen or undervalued. And when it comes to women,
in particular, this tends to mean labor that is
crucial for an organization or household to run, that
is not in fact valued in terms of merit,
performance reviews, annual reviews, or in many other ways.
So, invisible labor can take a couple of different
shapes. We have, for example, cognitive labor, that is
the labor it takes to coordinate kind of mentally
all the moving pieces in a household or within
a department. We have emotional labor that is taking
on the relational aspects of a job that aren't
necessarily in someone's job description. And what this amounts
to is The state where invisible labor is crucial
for an organization to run, and yet doesn't tend
to count at all for someone's actual job. So,
invisible labor is on the rise for women in
academia for a variety of Reasons, and this is
an acute problem. There are some studies coming out
of 2023 showing that there remain gender barriers and
expectations for women to perform this invisible labor that,
again, is crucial for universities to run, but is
not in fact recognized as such. I'll add an
additional note here that there is a theory called
congruency theory, which I think plays a role as
well. So, congruency theory says that if someone is
expected to act a certain way, then they are
judged by their performance on abiding what that expectation
is, and when they break from that, they are
punished. So, for example, women still, regardless of What
we might think in terms of being more open-minded
about women, the expectation for women is that women
will be relational, nurturing, and caring. This is also
expected in academia. And women, when women break from
those norms, They are punished much more than men
breaking from the norms expected of them. So, I
think that that also is part of this invisible
labor piece as well, because it means that women
are more constrained in how they need and want
to act. One additional point is that there are
a number of studies showing that women academics, particularly
faculty members, and particularly women of color, do a
lot of invisible labor when it comes to caring
for students, mentoring students, being a sounding board for
students. So, if we think about, for example, the
work it takes to advise students, you might have
a certain number of students in your advising load
as a faculty member, but that tends to increase
dramatically with unofficial advising by women faculty members and
especially women of color.
Mhm. Uh, DID you have any other points that
you wanted to add to this, uh, this topic
because I interrupted you to tell us more about
invisible labor.
So thank you for that. There are a few
other barriers that I'd like to point out that
are points of concern and sometimes concentrated effort for
women in academia. One, which is fairly common to
anyone is bias in student experiences of teaching, sometimes
called course evals. And so gender bias is pervasive.
There are some studies that have been done to
show that when that bias is mitigated, sometimes with
contextualized language to students to say, hey, just so
you know, right? Your responses might be gendered in
some way. When that language appears, then sometimes the
bias in those evaluations goes down. Um, BUT that
bias is still there. As a result, some universities
have chosen to throw out student evaluations or student
experiences of teaching from promotion and tenure concerns. Personally,
I don't think that that's The right approach, even
though I understand it. I think that student experiences
should be part of a holistic review of a
faculty member, but we do need to, uh, take
some steps to eliminate or reduce this gender bias.
And then just a few other points I make
about academia, um, if you don't mind. One is,
I think that we're also seeing a change in
terms of the roles that department chairs play in
universities. Department chairs, I I think used to hold
a little bit more leadership and vision value. And
now, in terms of organizational structures, they tend to
be seen more as managers. So, we're seeing more
women take the role of department chair, but the
power that used to come with an influence that
used to come with being a department chair doesn't
necessarily transfer over as well. Finally, I'll say that
like any other organization, And universities tend to have
a good amount of what are called ERGs or
BRGs. So, these are employee resource groups or business
resource groups that tend to care about certain kinds
of populations. I would say that as a good
in an organization, ERGs do provide some value, but
what ends up happening sometimes is when you have
an ERG for, say, mothers or for the LGT
LGBT. QIA plus populations, or, say, black academics or
any other kind of identity, what happens is sometimes
those people get pushed to the side and don't
have as much of a voice as they would.
So, I would say that this is another way
that we see some gender biases and challenges in
academia, because what it should be is that these
resource groups are funded and have voice and have
influence at the organizations that they're part of.
Yeah, that's all very interesting, and you know, I
just wanted to comment that I find it really
fascinating and interesting. I mean interesting from a purely
intellectual perspective because actually from a more moral or
political perspective it's actually kind of worrying, but I
don't know if you're aware of this, but there
are people in academia who in recent years have
been pushing for this sort of Feminization of academia
sort of narrative where they say that over the
course of the past few decades with more and
more girls and women entering into academia, which, I
mean, I just assumed that was something good, but
they, they say that because of that there was
this what they call feminization of academia in the
sense that they think that women, because when, when
they get into academia, women push more for things
like, for example, equity, justice, empathy than a pursuit
of truth, and I mean. Uh, I, I don't
see any evidence of that because I mean I
talk with, uh, women academics all the time and
I don't see any relevant difference in terms of
how they conduct their scientific research or philosophical research
or research in any other kind of academic domain
and also, I mean, I think that even if
there were such differences. Uh, I mean, so what,
I mean, first of all, that doesn't tell us
anything about where they come from, because I mean
it could be just from socialization and many of
the people who are pushing for this narrative are
actually arguing on the grounds of them being biological
differences, but I, I mean, where, where is the
Evidence for that. I mean, it could just be
socialization and women tend to be socialized to be
more nurturing, more empathetic, more and caring more about,
I, I guess other people in general than men
tend to be, but that's a result of socialization
and then, I mean, even if there were those,
let's say cognitive differences between men and women. I
mean, I just see it as something positive to
have more uh variety in academia because I mean,
I guess that more cognitive variety, not just, I
mean, differences in terms of Even personality between people,
but also having more cultural variety, people coming from
different cultural backgrounds, uh, is just better for, I
mean, we produce better knowledge if we have people
with a wider variety of perspectives. So, uh, and
I mean, and all of this, not even considering
the fact that. Uh, I mean, when women started
entering academia, they have, and even nowadays, as with
all the evidence you presented there, women have more
obstacles to getting to, uh, I, I mean, to
reaching a higher level of education. Also in pursuing
um research or or trying to get into a
tenure track career in terms of being professors and
so on. So I, I mean I don't understand.
I mean in a way I understand, I mean
it's the sort of a manifestation of the. Typical
conservative views that we tend to see and more
traditional views that we tend to see in society,
but on the other hand, I mean, particularly this
kind of narrative coming from some academics themselves, I
mean, it, it really seems weird to me. Uh,
WHAT are your thoughts on that?
Thank you for all of that. I agree that
it seems weird, and I think it seems weird
in this case because it is weird, and I
think it's a whole lot of cultural traditions and
histories kind of coming home to roost. So, as
you were talking, I was thinking about how the
perceived value of higher education itself right now, now,
granted, I'm in the United States, it's a little
bit different, especially right now, but the perceived value
of a higher education. HAS changed a lot in
the past few years in the United States. And
so, I think that there is at minimum, a
correlation with the percentage of women entering higher education.
So right now, we have about 60% of students
kind of across the United States receiving degrees are
women. And yet, at the same time, and again,
post hoc ergo hoc is a logical fallacy, but
at the same time, we now have a per
uh the perceived diminished value of higher education itself.
So, there are a lot of stories coming out
of the US about is higher education worth it.
And I think that we're not going to say
that there's a direct 1 to 1 causal relationship
between women. Entering higher education and the perceived value
decreasing, but I do think it's worth examining further
why we think these things. And so, there are,
you know, some studies being done about that. Whereas
those of us who are very committed to education,
we know the value it can bring to everyone,
to women, to men, to non-binary people, we know
the value it brings in research. And I do
think that the business world is, um, In this
case, a good example of how to think about
equity and inclusion, because the bottom line is that
when there are women at the table, the rates
of return are higher, more money is made, people
are happier, and the organizations overall do better. So
that's empirical data to just show it. Universities, I
think, are frustratingly, um, behind the times in many
ways, and this is one of them. So, if
they were just to say, look, our research output
could be stronger, our students are happier, more people
are successful, when women are at the table, we
could be making that argument more than we do.
Mm, yeah, yeah, I mean, I guess that it's
just what we should expect. There's always these reactionary
takes whenever, I mean, people, women in particular in
this case, but any, any kind of minority gets
access to a space in society where they were
not welcomed before, and I mean, I guess that
in a way they are still not welcomed, but
Uh, if you understand what I mean, but anyway,
anyway, I, I guess this is just to be
expected, at least to some extent.
Yes, and major thanks from all of us who
care about these things to the people doing this
research. And so to kind of think about intellectual
joy in a way, I feel grateful that there
are people doing this kind of research to expose
barriers that still exist. And I know we'll dive
into some of that, but my work and intellectual
joy really stemmed from me realizing that my entire
life as an academic, my entire life in retrospect,
so I'm, this is about for, call it 30
years now. HAS been about the right that everyone
has to ask fundamental questions about their lives and
world, and to have the confidence to be able
to enter into those conversations, even if or when
they're wrong. And so I realized that for me,
a few years ago, what I was caring about
didn't have a name, and so, you know, I,
I figured, here's an opportunity, and that name is
intellectual joy, or the philosophy version, the nerd version
is epistemic joy. My PhD is in philosophy, so
I'm, I'm constantly writing a little bit about that
as well. But what I understand intellectual joy to
be is The satisfaction and Feeling that one has
when you know yourself as a thinker and you
appreciate other people and their capacity to think as
well. Now, it seems like that shouldn't be a
big deal, but it is a big deal. It's
a big deal, especially for people who have been
long excluded from intellectual life. So, among them, of
course, women and people of color in the Western
world, and so my work has been on, on
women. Um, SO, for me, it was important to
kind of think this through, both in terms of
education. I'm starting to write a book on intellectual
joy in teaching and learning, and I'm halfway through
a book on advancing intellectual joy for women at
work, which I know is the basis of our
conversation today. So, when I started talking about these
ideas with people, especially as the faculty director of
our executive MBA program, and in giving talks to
a couple 1000 different organizations, or a couple 1000
different people at organizations, um, I started realizing that
women were really resonating with this concept of intellectual
joy, because it also gave them a name for
something that they felt was lacking in their organizations
and in their lives. You know, I work a
lot with With mid-career women. And I've also, of
course, worked a lot with students entering their first
careers. And what they want is to be valued
as a knower, as a thinker, as a curious
person. And what they often find is that there
aren't resources in their organizations to be able to
be valued in that way. Especially when, and this
is the kicker for women, especially when there's enormous
pressure on girls and women. To find their value
in being right and not in their capacity as
a thinker. So part of intellectual joy for women
then, I think means, and for girls, I think
means being able to be wrong and have that
be OK. As we'll talk about, women are overly
punished for these things, but you need to be
able to be wrong and still be valued. I
don't think we can have intellectual joy if that's
not the case.
I, I mean, I guess that for, for people
to have intellectual joy, I mean, they have to
incur the risk of being wrong several times because
I mean we have to be wrong before we
get things right and also uh being wrong uh
several times and then uh I mean step by
step, getting closer to get being right or getting
to the truth is actually represented. INTELLECTUAL growth, right,
and that is part of the process. So if
we're just, uh, I mean, assuming that people should
just get things right all the time or the
first time they try something that, that's just, I
guess, at least to some extent anti-intellectual even.
I think so too. And I think that this
is where my beloved discipline of philosophy and the
discipline you love too, gets this very wrong, in
fact, because in the tiny bit of work I
have managed to find on epistemic joy, the way
that philosophers talk about it is joy in being
right. So that's where you find your joy, right?
In the knowledge that you are right. I think
this is wrong. I actually think it's philosophically wrong,
actually. Um, BUT let me share a, a story
of how I talk about this with students. So
I've talked about intellectual joy with a couple 100
students as well. So, for example, when I talk
with students about intellectual joy, I'll ask them about
the most recent exam they took, and I'll say,
all right, so you all just took, say, a
biology exam. You worked hard, you studied really hard
for it, and you take the exam. What do
you do after you've taken the exam? And almost
to a student, they say the same thing, which
is, we wait anxiously and nervously for that exam
to come back, so we know how we did,
and then we'll know whether to be happy or
sad. Yeah. And I think to myself, OK, on
one hand, that's very understandable, right? Like, you're, you're
taking an exam, you're submitting it to an expert,
you might feel a little nervous. But when I
ask them about that time between taking the exam
and getting it back, what I really want them
to be thinking, what I really, really want them
to be thinking, is almost kind of in terms
of Eastern philosophy, which is cut your losses, right?
This is a detachment from outcome. And what you
need to do is kind of go through your
own mind to consider where you might have made
mistakes, what you didn't know in the way that
you thought you did, and so on, so that
you can gain that confidence as a knower. And
yet, students are so trained, I think, to be
results-driven, or in a thin way, success-driven, or goal-driven
without being purpose-driven, that they just forget all of
this. I think that they come to it sometimes
later in life, but it's, it's not really a
mystery to me that these are the people entering
our workforces, who then put all of their kind
of credibility and merit on what other people are
thinking of them in terms of their performance, without
thinking about their own relationship to curiosity, to questions,
to their own efforts and studying, and so on.
Yeah, you, you know, when it comes to that
specifically, I guess that as you said, it's understandable
and also because it's the way our education systems
are structured, right? I mean they are results driven.
We basically go to university to get the highest
grades possible. I mean the. Our main goal is
to get a particular grade. I mean, it's not,
it's not that we are commonly thinking about, um,
I don't know, developing our thinking skills, our critical
thinking skills, developing or acquiring more knowledge about this
or that subject. It's just that we want to
get that A. Or in Portugal, for example, uh,
20 because our grades go from 1 to 20.
So I, I mean it's just the way the
system is structured and I guess that uh in
our more results driven and particularly in our capitalist
societies, we sort of lost this thing that was
very common among um Pre, yeah, pre-capitalist, pre-modern thinkers,
and even, I mean, I guess you, we still
have that in thinkers from the 19th century as
well, uh, where, uh, you need time to digest
what you learn, what you read, what you study.
And you need time to come up with ideas
and so people used to give lots of importance
to having time just to do nothing. I mean,
and, and and now and nowadays, I mean, if
you talk about Uh, taking time to do nothing,
you've, you're looked down on because, uh, people are
just, oh what are you doing with that time
then are you just wasting it? But I mean,
it's not wasting time. It's just that you actually
need to rest and take your time to digest
what you learn and to actually have time to
come up with ideas, so.
I co-signed that, and I think we have a
very messed up relationship, um, in terms of, quote,
work-life balance in that way. I hate that phrase,
but you're also making me think about the ancient
Greek word for leisure, which was school, which is,
right, the idea of school or scholarship, but to
be able to take that time. And this makes
me think about one thing that's been on my
mind lately, and I'm trying to write this out
as part of the book, is about what happens
in our current moment where we have ideas at
the wrong time. So, in our organizations, we do
not tend to have a culture that can allow
for the birthing of an idea or the execution
of something novel, because we have KPIs, we have
performances, to, we have outputs, we have goals, and
the, the churn just keeps churning. However, I think
that if we do care about intellectual joy in
our organizations, we need to be a little more
creative about what happens when, say, a talented person
is having an original idea or is having a,
a creative thought. I was doing a session on
intellectual joy for a group of women leaders a
few weeks ago, actually, and there's this woman who
is just this outstanding literal rock star, and so
she runs, excuse me. She runs a group called
Girls Rock Milwaukee. So I'm from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and
also Ladies Rock Milwaukee, and the names are about
to change to Let's Get Loud, so that it's
more intentionally gender inclusive. Um, BUT she was saying
that what she asked for, for the last holiday
from her spouse. It was a creative getaway time.
She said, you take the kid, I need to
go away for 3 days. I need to write
my music. I need to listen to some things.
I need to go for walks. I need to
think my thoughts. And he said, Done and done.
And she did, and it was utterly transformational for
her. I also crave that time, and as it
turns out, a lot of women in our organizations
do. And so, one thing that I talk about
with women leaders in particular, is how do we
protect that time for deep work or deep focus.
There's a phrase I really like that I came
across in my research called, quote, time confetti. And
that's the way that women, in particular, tend to
have their time explode in little bits. With people
needing them all the time. This is part of
the invisible labor piece that we were talking about
before, right? You're getting texts from a partner, from
a kid, from a parent, from a coworker, just
kind of constantly, your email is blowing up and
so on. And so the phrase that I came
across was time confetti, which is what happens when
that time just kind of erupts into a bunch
of little teeny tiny pieces that fall all over
someone. But I was talking about that concept with
a different group of women leaders, and someone raised
their hand and said, you know, Doctor Shi, that
is not time confetti, that's time shrapnel. And I
thought to myself, that's right, right? Because confetti makes
it sound like this is an enjoyable or even
celebratory experience, when really what's happening is women's deep
work and time for deep work is being destroyed.
Which leads me to another point, which is that
post-COVID, we've seen a strong return to 100% being
in the workplace from an annoyingly large number of
companies. And we also see this with a lot
of universities as well. Faculty, of course, tend to
be on different kinds of tracks and tend to
have more autonomy in their jobs, but with academic
staff and, uh, all of the support at universities,
we're seeing this kind of return. To 100% in-person
work. But in organizations, this is especially damaging for
women. It's also especially damaging for women of color,
who a lot of times, if they are moving
in predominantly white spaces, need a little bit of
time to not be on as what is called
a quote, double only in terms of having multiple
identity markers in a space. So, I think that
what we've seen is that with the increase of
technology, it should be that more work should be
able to be done in an autonomous way and
still be trusted to make competent decisions because that's
what autonomy is, right? To be trusted as a
person to make regularly competent decisions. Um, SO it
should be that we have the technology to support,
say, adaptable workplaces, but organizations are harming women at
work by mandating unnecessarily a 100% return to in-office
work. I think that there's a, a false perception
going on here, which is that sometimes organizational leaders
fear that work is not being done if they're
not micromanaging it and seeing it. But I'd also
offer that the opposite is not necessarily the case.
Just because someone is in the workplace doesn't necessarily
mean that they're, quote, working or working well. So,
I think that if we want to talk about
intellectual joy for women in organizations, we need to
be thinking about what an organization values in terms
of productivity and a commitment to a person's actual
well-being. And if they can value women at work,
then by necessity, some changes would follow. Form follows
function.
Yeah, and I think that another important thing probably
to mention here is the fact that in our
capitalist societies we just assume that, oh, if you're
not at work, then it's it's leisure time, but
it's actually, it's actually not because you have not
only to commute and that's also, I mean, I,
I think it should be considered. Part of work
actually. I mean just the time you spend commuting
because I mean you're not having any leisure time
then but anyway, but, but then you get home
and you have housework and we have to remember
also that unfortunately because of the gender roles that
are still very dominant in our societies, I mean,
Almost everywhere or almost everywhere, uh, particularly in the
most developed societies, it falls mostly on women, and
I mean just last year I saw a statistic
that it just blew my mind that, uh, I
mean, when you compare single men, uh, and single
women to, uh, married or partner, partnered men and
women, I mean. When a single man become as
a girlfriend or a wife, I mean, their average,
the average number of hours they spend on housework
per week doesn't go up. It's, it's around 10
when they're single and it stays around 10 when
they have a partner, but for the women it
goes from 10. To 17, so I, I'm, I
was, I was just like, really? But, but are
you guys not doing anything at all at home?
I mean, because it just blew my mind because
whenever I have a partner in my life, I
mean, I, and I Lived with them, we lived
together. It never crossed my mind even once that
I shouldn't be doing my fair share of housework,
but,
and we, and we, so let me just pull
apart a few pieces of that too. So thank
you for that example. Um, YOU know, COVID was
devastating to women. It was devastating to everyone, but
it was especially devastating to women because men. Quote,
enjoyed COVID a lot more than women. And in
academia, productivity, research productivity went down a lot and
set women back by at least 10 years in
terms of making up these gaps. Also, the United
Nations projects that it's going to take at least
50 years to, to get back to where we
were. Pre-COVID with the gender kind of equity gap
there. And I think you also see ways that
we tend to talk about if, uh, if we're
talking about a heterosexual relationship, and if there are
children involved, you know, a woman taking care of
the children, I mean, that's what they're supposed to
do. But if a man is doing it, then
he's, quote, helping. And that's a very strange phrase.
I'd like to make one more point thinking about
organizational culture, if that's OK. Um, SO I drive
a stick shift, and I've always driven a stick
shift, so a manual car, manual transmission. And I
bought the last one in Wisconsin a few years
ago that's not a sports car, and it was
actually right around COVID. And my, because my 20-year
Honda Civic had given out. And so, I like
to downshift when I need to get up a
hill or, you know, rough terrain or whatever it
is, and it kind of makes you feel powerful
in a way to downshift. So, you might think,
what does that have to do with women at
work? Well, if there's one thing that I've been
acutely attuned to, both as someone who has studied
ancient Greek philosophy, and as someone who pays attention
to organizational cultures, it's been to the ways that
we tend to euphemize situations going on. So in
COVID, and you might remember this, there was a
euphemism that women were, quote, choosing to, quote, downshift
their careers. And I was paying very close attention
to this because choosing, of course, um, opens this
idea that, that there's either a voluntary choice being
made or say an involuntary, when I think that
the, the situation is a non-voluntary one to kind
of hat tip to Aristotle here. So, women choosing
to step back from leadership positions, which I believe
the statistic was they did 40% more than men,
um, this is a choice, maybe in name only,
because if circumstances were different, I don't think women
would be choosing to do that. And this idea
of downshifting is this idea, of course, that we
are going to go slower, that we're going to
take our time or have more of that leisure
we've been talking about, when in reality, I already
gave away the lead, but to downshift means that
you have to do something hard. And I would
say that for women, especially in emerging leadership positions
or at the top of their careers, or just
trying to make it in their track, Downshifting is
an extremely hard thing to do because you're trying
to reconcile with your professional identity in that, and
you're having to make very hard choices that are
not really choices in some ways, because it's not
like you have uh an equal opportunity that's kind
of on a par to use philosopher Ruth Chang's
language. It's not like you could choose to do
this or not choose to do this. This is
the situation. Right, and this is the context, and
so women quote, choosing to downshift, it makes them
sound like they're going out to frolic in a
field and pick some flowers, when that is the
opposite of reality.
Yeah, and then there's also that aspect to consider
where, and there's also statistics on this, but usually
when men become fathers, they get a salary raise,
and when women become mothers, their salary usually drops,
so there's also that.
That's right.
Yeah, so I, I mean, but focusing specifically on
intellectual joy, what would you say are some of
the main barriers that women have to deal with
in their lives and jobs if you want to,
you can, you, you can also mention academia when
it comes to experiencing or achieving intellectual joy.
Sure, so thank you for that question. Um, THERE
are many barriers to women experiencing intellectual joy, and
I'd like to a little bit talk through, um,
what intellectual disempowerment is because we're really talking about,
you know, intellectual empowerment. So, let me talk through
a little bit what intellectual disempowerment is, and then
I'll talk through some ways that that tends to
show up in our world, um, and then maybe
we'll talk about some things that we could do
about that. So, to start off, intellectual disempowerment identifies
ways that people are undermined as knowers and all
suffer as a result. An example I like to
use is, I taught high school girls for 5
years, and I would teach the active voice and
passive voice in writing. And when I would teach
the active voice, um, I would use an example
like, Maria kicks the puppy. And, of course, all
my girls are like, oh my gosh, Maria, we
have to go find her. She kicked a puppy,
right? We can identify the person causing the harm.
That's an active harm. Whereas if I say the
puppy was kicked, The girls all want to know
who kicked the puppy. Right. Whether you can identify
the person doing the harm or not, the result
is the same. The puppy has been harmed. Um,
A quick side note, I was using this exact
example in a different leadership training group I was,
I was hosting the other day, and I used
that exact example. And when it came to the
puppy was kicked, I said, What do you want
to know? And someone raised their hand and said,
what the puppy do? And I was like, no,
that is not the right question, right? Because it's
a puppy. But the result is the same. So,
intellectual disempowerment can happen by way of, say, a
mustache twirling, kind of typical cartoon villain boss who
creates a toxic culture, say, or it can happen
in a way that you can't quite name, but
the result is the same. And in this case,
when we're thinking of gender, women and girls are
harmed. So, my research has taken me to the
domains of education, work, and art, and thinking about
this intellectual disempowerment. And, um, I will say that
if anyone is interested in looking at people who
are absolutely killing it in terms of advocating for
gender equity, people listening to this podcast should listen,
uh, should look up museum archivists doing the work
of trying to bring women artists into museums. So,
If we can say, for example, that art, at
a minimum, is a manifestation of someone's ideas, and
if ideas seem to be an indication of our
intellect, and there might be some joy in making
them manifest, even if there's anguish, Then let's consider
a study that was done a few years ago
to show that there is a 47.6% gender discount
when an artist is a woman as opposed to
a man. So, there was a study done showing
that 1.6 million works of art were put up
at auction, and when those names of artists were
removed, The, a work of art was valued at,
say, $40,000. But when the names were put back
on, and it was revealed that the art was
created by a woman, that value plummets by 47.6%.
So, it's about a 50% discount for being a
woman as an artist. So, a conclusion from this
study is that women's art appears to sell for
less because it is made by a woman, not
because that woman is less genius than a man.
And I like thinking of Frida Kahlo here, who,
you know, was married to Diego Rivera, but there's
a great article from the Detroit Free Press in,
you know, the middle of the 20th century, saying
what that's interviewing her as an emerging artist, and
the title is Wife of the Master Mural Painter
gleefully dabbles in Works of Art. And in this
little anecdote story about her, she says, I didn't
study with Diego, I didn't study with anyone, I
just started to paint, and then the journalist writes,
then her eyes begin to twinkle. Of course, she
explains, he does pretty well for a little boy,
but it is I who am the big artist.
And I love thinking about this because she was
so, and Ricardo, to your point earlier, she was
so out of her time and kind of ahead
of her time, and to make this sort of
change, you need these original people to be able
to do these things. But the art world is
really pointing out the major lacunae that we still
have in terms of valuing women as thinkers and
artists. A few other examples of how this shows
up, um, this might be a, a known. One
to your listeners. But in 2018, Serena Williams, the
just superstar tennis player, um, did something kind of
crazy and got into a fight with an ump
in a tennis match. And she was absolutely wrung
out for, um, for arguing back to the ump.
Now, of course, when a male athlete does something
like this, he tends to be seen as Passionate,
whereas a woman, especially a black woman athlete, is
seen as a stereotype as the angry woman, right?
Who does she think she is? Um, I love,
love, love that in response, in 2019, Serena Williams
went on and founded the first majorly black private
equity foundation in the entire world, which I believe
is worth now half a billion dollars. So, we
see these, these stereotypes and we see these consequences
happen in many different ways, um, in terms of
people being actively harmed or quote passively harmed, but
the harm is the same. Now, if you want
to talk about specific kinds of harm, the first
kind of harm that I talk about in my
research is, uh, what I call the punishment gap.
And this is the concept that women are punished
for their mistakes at a much more severe degree
than men are. So, Women and people of color
generally are punished more harshly for making mistakes at
work than white men are. Um, SOME statistics off
the bat, women CEOs are 45% more likely to
be fired than male CEOs. And here's a, an,
a bit of research I came across that's especially
troubling, which is that future referrals decline by a
third when a woman surgeon loses a patient, while
no decline in referrals happens if the surgeon is
male. And so, my research shows through these studies
that time and again, women are punished much more
than men. A 2024 study shows that women leaders
are more punished than men when violating cultural gender
norms. So, for example, what this means is that
women are Unlikely to go for promotions or leadership
positions, if they even get a whiff that there
could be the possibility of backlash from subordinates. So,
if, say, your peer cohort group might resent you
for going for a leadership position, you're not going
to go for it. And this happens to women
a lot more than men. So, these researchers concluded
that when backlash is possible, men are unaffected, they'll
still go for the promotion, they don't care, while
women are significantly less likely to want to be
managers. So that's another example of, I'd say, the
punishment gap, where women are subjected to a lot
more retaliation or punishment than men in organizations.
Mhm. Yeah, when it comes to, by, by the
way, when earlier I asked you about, uh, academia
specifically, and since we're also talking here more broadly
about intellectual joy, uh, I, I, I was just
going to ask you to comment on something. I,
I, I, I don't know if you also, because
of course, I, I don't, uh, I'm not part
of academia itself. I talk with a lot of
academics, but I'm not part of that environment. Uh,
I mean, I see many times people on social
media, I, I mean Twitter particularly for the obvious
reasons, uh, that, uh, for example, um, uh, a
female, uh, woman, a woman philosopher, a woman academic
in some way, I mean, because, uh, uh, she
finishes her PhD or for example, she just posts
on. Uh, EX or Twitter that, uh, she's, um,
a philosopher or an academic of any other kind
and, and then uh she immediately uh she immediately
gets backlash, particularly from men. SAYING, oh, you, you,
I mean, are, are making basically the the claim
sometimes it's more overtly, other times more covertly that
she shouldn't be taken seriously intellectually because she's a
woman and I, I I mean that's just a
horrendous thing to say that just because you're a
woman, you're a female, that you shouldn't be taken
as seriously when it comes to your intellectual achievements
as men because you should just be at all.
Or you should just be having kids or whatever.
I, I, I mean, do you also think that's,
uh, or, or do you also see that frequently
in academia and see it as a, a problem
that women are taken less seriously on an intellectual
level than, uh, men and look down on, uh,
when it comes to their intellectual achievements?
I do see that. I don't think that people
are As vocal as they used to be about
those sorts of things, but I did a podcast
interview, uh, a few months ago on a different
topic. And, you know, the first comment on that
podcast was, well, what could she know? She's a
woman. And I'm thinking to myself, this is ridiculous,
right? And what are you so scared of, you
little men, right? Like, what are you so scared
of? And And I'm, I, I don't understand it,
but I think it's because, um, of what Miranda
Fricker calls, and I, I love this language, credibility
excess and credibility deficit. So, credibility excess happens when
someone is granted potentially even more credibility than they
deserve on a topic just by virtue of their
identity markers. And this is all, of course, situated
in terms of cultural norms and so on and
so forth. So, those identity markers can change, but
depending on where you are in the world and
what the situation is and such, and then credibility
deficit happens when someone is not given as much
credit. Um, OR believability as they deserve for being
in a certain space. As a woman in philosophy,
I have certainly gone through this myself in a
huge number of ways, and especially as a woman
whose first main work was in Greek philosophy, where
I was thought not to be, quote, feminist enough
sometimes. But in, in terms of your question, absolutely.
I find it to be day in, day out,
that women are constantly undervalued as thinkers. Uh, Quick
example of this, I was giving a talk on
intellectual joy for women at work a couple weeks
ago. Um, FUN note, during a blizzard in the
middle of Wisconsin at a water park resort for
an annual conference, which is just a funny thing
to do. So, and you're like, what is a
water park resort? I didn't know either until I
went to one. But I was talking with these
women whose work is in providing in-home care, um,
to children, especially neurodivergent and emodivergent children, and to
their families. And this work doesn't have to be
done by women, but everyone there was a woman.
And so everyone there doing what I would call
pink collar work, that is, This is a term
that describes work that gets to be undervalued because
it's done by a woman, which means that you
don't have to be paid as much, you don't
have to have the same kinds of benefits and
so on, um, because it's seen as helping work.
So, you have these women doing pink collar work,
who, when I asked them, who here is respected
as an expert, In their field, they laughed in
my face, and they said none of us experiences
being um appreciated as someone with competence and value.
Um, AND it's because we do have these ideas,
right? And that, that some fields are more serious
or rigorous than others. This is being laid out
in the universities right now. Humanities are being denigrated
and the hard sciences are exalted, so on and
so forth. Um, BUT yeah, to answer your question
in a very straight way, yes, I see this
still happening. One thing that I have personally found
of enormous value as I'm in the middle of
my life and, you know, kind of in the
upper part of my career, is finding women friends
in different disciplines at the university to just kind
of form a little troupe and, uh, go about
your business. And so, I find that to be
just counterculturally affirming, and my hope is that Um,
everyone who needs friends like that, even in the
middle of their life, can have them, because then
you can, you know, say damn the haters and
do the, do the thing you were kind of
born to do.
Yeah, you, you know, you were mentioning that certain
academic fields are less valued than others, and, uh,
curiously enough, they tend the ones that tend to
be more undervalued are also the ones that tend
to be associated with women. I mean, even that
is gender. And gendered against women.
Absolutely,
yes. Yeah, because for example, oh, social sciences, they
are not as valuable as the hard sciences. Humanities
are not as valuable as the sciences in general.
Philosophy is not as valuable as, I don't know,
law or something like that. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And it's, it's really shocking that universities, which should
be places that appreciate sound logic and reason, um,
sometimes don't, and sometimes overlook empirical evidence that shows
the contrary. So, for example, since my home discipline
is philosophy, you know, it's shown that philosophy majors
actually make a decent amount of money, as in
philosophy majors make A decent living, a very decent
living, about 10 years after graduating with a philosophy
major. Now, no one really thinks that, but they
make more money than business majors and a lot
of other majors. This is hard fact. This is
evidence. This is empirical data. And yet, what is
it that we're seeing cut in universities? Philosophy majors.
This is also happening, um, for, I think, political
reasons. Some states are cutting philosophy majors, and I
will not go into juicy details about that, but
it is deeply troubling for anyone who wants to
stay coupled to reality and who cares about critical
thinking.
Yeah, and I think that it's not just about
potential future earnings and I mean, I mean how
it can translate in some way economically. I mean,
it's also that knowledge itself is valuable, and I
mean sometimes I get very frustrated because there are,
I mean, I talk with tons of scientists on
the show as well, and unfortunately among Many scientists,
scientists, it's they're, there's still that very common idea
that, oh, we moved past philosophy, we don't need
philosophy anymore, and I mean it's a silly idea,
not just because historically. Uh, PHILOSOPHY was the foundation
of science, but also, uh, I mean that strict
disciplinary division between philosophy and science and the different
sciences. I mean, it's artificial because, I mean, historically
people didn't really differentiate between philosophy and science and
this and that kind of science. It was all,
uh, I, I mean, philosophy or knowledge or science
or whatever you want to. To call it, I
mean, but there was not a strict demarcation between
philosophy and science. And also, I, I mean, if
the scientists think that they don't need philosophy, it's
just because they're ignorant and not following philosophy of
science and the philosophy of the different sciences out
there because they actually need that kind of, that
kind of grounding work. For science to work.
So I would agree with that. And, you know,
there's a reason that the highest degree is a
PhD, which is a doctorate in philosophy, which, which
means that on the most basic level, you can
do theory in your field, and there's a meta-cognitive
element there. It means that you're thinking about your
field, but at its highest level, every discipline ends
in philosophy. Of course, it makes it, you know,
funny to get a PhD in philosophy, a doctorate
of philosophy and philosophy, and there's some good jokes
to be had there. Um, BUT it, but that
remains true. And so, to give up on theory
in a world that desperately needs it, I don't
think we should be doing. And I actually, I
talked with this a good amount even in my
own job. And when I'm giving these different talks
on intellectual joy, but even in my role as
a director of Teaching Excellence, we are always so
quick to action. When what we need sometimes are
good ideas, right? And we need to think about
what we are aiming our action toward. So the
goal can't just be, for example, growth for growth's
sake, right? We need 20% more business. What are
we aiming toward? What is the, the T loss,
the end, or the goal? So, to that end,
if we go back to these different gaps that
we were talking about, um, the credibility gap, and
I will also say the authority gap, which is
being underestimated, you know, by, by virtue of your
identity markers, um, I'll say that there's a brilliant
economist who actually was just fired from her job
in the federal government, but her name is Lisa
Cook, and I've been reading her for years. She
actually had a PhD or she had a master's
and undergrad degree in philosophy. And then she was
hiking up a mountain. I listened to a bunch
of podcast interviews with her. She was hiking up
a mountain trying to figure out if she was
going to go get a PhD in philosophy or
not. And the person she was hiking with said,
you need to get a PhD in economics. And
she said, OK. And he said, so here's what
you're going to do. You're gonna go to Russia
for 2 years, you're going to learn Russian, and
then you're going to kick ass, basically in economics.
And so she did. And she, you know, was
a senior advisor at the highest levels and came
out of the state of Michigan. But before she
got into those public positions, she was doing extraordinary
work to show, and to this ROI point, we
might want to say that it doesn't matter about
money and so on and so forth, but this
is one way that a case is made, right?
So she has done extraordinary work to show that
if more women and African-Americans were participating in the
technical innovation that leads to patents, GDP per capita
in the United States would be 0.6 to 4.4%
higher than it is. I mean, just straight up
higher, if some of these barriers were removed. And
so, what is a patent? A patent is the
manifestation of an idea that's validated in a legal
way. And so, you know, if these barriers that
women experience were removed, um, other studies show, and
this is a study from 2019, other studies show
that we would have over 4 times more inventors.
THAN we have. And we need inventors, right? We
need people to be solving problems and having original
ideas and thinking at the intersection of multiple different
disciplines. But because these barriers exist specifically for girls
and women, we are worse off as a society
and world. It's not just worse for women, it's
worse for everyone than we would otherwise be. So
we can imagine, yeah, go ahead.
I mean, you've already talked about the punishment gap,
I guess that earnings we've already touched on that,
and in your work you also talk about the
authority gap, right? So could you tell us about
that
one? Yes, so the authority gap means that it
takes a lot more for women to be seen
as having credibility and authority than it takes for
men. So there are some studies that show, for
example, that in an organization, even when a black
woman speaks and says anything, she's not even attributed
her ideas correctly, about 45% of the time. And
so, the authority gap means that women, when they
do have ideas, are often kind of dislodged from
them, and they're not seen to have the authority
that men are necessarily granted. So, when we were
talking about credibility, excess, and deficit, um, I often
share that a lot of times when I'm teaching
philosophy 1001 classes to a bunch of usually first
year traditional students, I will, at some point in
the middle of this class, as I'm talking about
my love of philosophy, I will at some point
go over to the board and write something in
Greek on the board, and then turn around, and
I see their faces calibrating. Oh my gosh. He
knows something I don't know. And over the course
of 25 years teaching Phil 101, I have kind
of taken this up, not just because I love
it, and I love to write Greek on the
board, which I do, but because I know that
I need to establish credibility and authority in a
way that some other people don't. Even though I'm
no longer a 29-year-old professor, I'm still doing these
things. And you can see them kind of calibrate.
I can think of another example. Where I had
a student who had his phone out, quote, secretly,
it's never secret. This was a long time ago.
And I was, um, teaching something, and he had
his phone out and he was fact checking me
with something that I had written, which was very
strange, because I, I got to ask him, I
said, do you know who wrote that? And he's
like, oh, I found it on the internet. I
think some guy. And I said, it was me.
This person right here, wrote that thing that you're
just trying to fact check me with. Now, the
authority gap is devastating to women at work, and,
um, What I've learned from surveying a couple 1000
women at this point is that this authority gap
tends to come from not having a supportive workplace
that helps them find their voice. It also comes
from not having champions of them as leaders or
workers or producers in any given room. So, when
we think about countering the authority gap, one way
to do this is through amplification. And an easy
way to amplify someone's ideas, and this is just
a quick trick, consider it, but an easy way
to amplify someone's ideas is to connect their name
to their idea 3 times. It's kind of like
a commercial, right? So connect their name to the
idea 3 times. In President Obama's White House, his
staff actually started doing this on a regular basis.
So when one of them would have a good
idea, then that idea would be repeated with the
person's name 3 times. This is a way to
increase credibility and authority, especially for people who've long
been marginalized.
Mhm. Yeah, and I guess that this would then
also translate into who gets attributed the merit for
their own intellectual work because I mean we know
historically and even contemporarily unfortunately that many times it's
women doing the actual work, but men. Taking credit
for it. I mean, even just two famous examples,
uh, we always talk about how Crick and Watson
discovered the structure of DNA, but it was actually
Rosalind Franklin and her students. So, but everyone always
says it's, it says it's Cree and Watson, where,
where. COULD just say, OK, so it was like
a, I mean it was not actually collaboration because
they just stole her work, but I mean they
could just give at least the same level of
credit and merit to Rosalind Franklin, but people just
decide to ignore her and The other example I
was going to give was when Marie Curie was
about to be to get the Nobel Prize. I
mean actually originally they were going to give it
or attribute it to Pierre Curie, her husband, but
fortunately she had a a proper husband and he
declined to receive the Nobel Prize unless it was
shared with shared with, shared with her. So you
know it's. Yeah, yeah, so, so it's always this
kind of, uh, I mean, this kind of mess
where, uh, women many times are the ones doing
the actual work, but it's always or almost always
a men getting the credit for it.
I think that many I would say, I would
say that the vast majority of people I talk
about this idea with, because intellectual joy just resonates
as a concept, especially with women. They're like, that's
the name of the thing. A vast majority of
women with whom I have discussed this idea and
who've done work around this idea would 100% co-sign
that. And in fact, I'd say that that's something
like a, A secret or undernoticed or invisible, if
you will, plight of women, especially in middle management
positions, is that they do a bulk of the
work. The teams do a bulk of the work,
and then someone else takes credit. And we certainly
see this in academia as well. And this is
why I think, like, there's some good work being
done on citation politics and kind of doing your
due diligence in terms of citing people appropriately and.
Properly, something that is, and we will not talk
about this, certainly going out the window with AI,
but citation politics, um, you know, is very alive
and well, and to the best ability that we
can, we should, we should do the work of
excavating who originate, who originated an idea, um, who
sustained it, what their contributions were, and so on,
without necessarily having to be 100% accurate all the
time.
Yeah, and how do you think that these barriers
that we talked about, I mean, like, for example,
the authority gap, the punishment gap, the earnings gap
can be broken down?
So I think They can be broken down by
a in a few different ways. First, I think
that individual people themselves can work to break them
down, but that is not going to be sufficient
for systemic change. So, second, I think that leaders
need to work on changing. Their organizational culture for
a variety of reasons. And a lot of the
reasons we've already talked about, given that organizations, especially
for-profit organizations, do very much care about turning a
profit, which is, on one hand, totally fine. It's
shown that workplaces that um are more inclusive and
do these sorts of things that we've been talking
about, have a higher rate of return. Major employee
satisfaction surveys show that only 6% of employees think
that their organizations are doing a great job in
terms of retention, climate, culture, and so on, and
organizational leaders should be persuaded to care about those
things. Now, what do I think it would take
kind of bigger than that? I think it would
take an existential shift in paying attention to, um,
paying attention to our just most basic humanity and
curiosity and realizing that a lot of what we're
Caring about in our day to day life is,
um, a little bit of a sham. So, I
think that what you can do is, is really
pay attention to seven different elements of intellectual joy.
Um, AND I've written a good amount about this.
I actually have a white paper that I wrote
in 2023 about intellectual joy for women at work,
and then I have a workbook that, uh, is
an accompanying part of that. I'm turning all of
this into a bigger book right now. But I've
had organizational leaders use this work on intellectual joy
in their organizations, for example, to change how they
do performance reviews, to have different discussions with people
on their teams. Um, AND in fact, for some
of them, for the very first time, I've had
them advocate to upper leadership about caring about intellectual
joy, and I've had students even work on how
to change an entire organization to care about intellectual
joy. But in short, I think that there are
what I've called 7 A's, um, to increase intellectual
joy. And so, when I started thinking about these
constitutive elements, and I'll just run through them very
quickly, I started thinking about Really practical, yet theoretically
viable ways to increase intellectual joy in our lives
and work. And so, these components are autonomy, advocacy,
access, amplification, authenticity, accountability, and adoration. And I've talked
about these with thousands of people at this time.
So, I think that each one of them is
an absolute requirement for intellectual joy to a varying
degree. I also think that what's necessary for intellectual
joy in any organization is what's called psychological safety.
Psychological safety is a term that I think a
good number of people are familiar with now, but
not everyone. Psychological safety, I would say is like
an a priori condition to intellectual joy in an
organization, that is, it has to exist in order
for organ for intellectual joy to take hold in
an organizational in an organization's culture. So, psychological safety
means that a person is not just allowed, but
expected to speak up with ideas if they see
something that's going wrong, um, if they notice something
that's not right, if they have an opinion, that
they're expected and encouraged to speak up. This is
especially important for women who, as we've discussed, are
overly punished for their ideas and certainly are overly
punished for being wrong. So, psychological safety then is
really important. Psychological safety doesn't mean that everyone feels
good all the time, that is not the point.
And in fact, in the literature, there are some
people who talk about psychologically brave spaces instead of
psychologically safe spaces, but, um, I actually think these
are the same thing. I think too that a
psychologically safe space means that organizations are paying attention
to the kinds of employees they have and how
they need to be communicated with. So, for example,
if we think about neurodivergent employees, they need a
different kind of communication often than a neurotypical employee
does. Sometimes they need more direct communication, sometimes they
need Um, certain kinds of schedules and so on.
I also think the same thing about emo diversity.
If there's one thing that I cannot stand in
a workplace, it's toxic positivity. Someone jumping out of
the bushes and saying, hey, isn't it a great
day to work at Marquettes, and you kind of
want to die inside. Um, YOU know, so that
toxic positivity, where, where it's assumed that you can't
say anything critical, or just have a bad day
or not be in a great mood, that will
tank a psychologically safe organization as well. So, to
kind of work backwards from that, I think that
what's needed for intellectual joy in any organization is
for there to be a culture of psychological safety.
But then to increase psychological to increase intellectual joy,
we need to think about the seven A's. Um,
AND there are things that everyone can do, right?
So, we can think, for example, about who has
access to information. IN an organization. A lot of
times, it's just who has access? Well, the people
who've always had access, and then we're kind of
reinforcing the status quo. But if we think about
how intellectual joy is caring about increasing knowledge and
feeling kind of your capacity as a knower expand,
then to do that, of course, you need to
have access to information. If we think about authenticity,
for example, as a requirement for intellectual joy, to
bring your authentic self to work does not mean
that you get to say and do whatever you
want, because it's possible that sometimes you're just a
jerk and you're being your authentic self, but you're
Authentic self, in that case, kind of sucks. But
authenticity does mean that a person tends to be
aligned between their values and how they act. And
I think that authentic people tend to be more
trustworthy, um, than inauthentic people. If we think about
accountability as a component of intellectual joy, I hope
that there's a day when organizations can Have employees
who can be held accountable both for their great
ideas and for their not so great ideas without
accountability always being negative. So, a word that I
hate these days is feedback. It has yet to
be The case that an employee has ever heard
from their leader or from a coworker, Hey, Ricardo,
I have some feedback for, for some feedback for
you. And you say, oh, great, this is going
to be wonderful. No, it always has a negative
connotation. When I think about, for example, when I
taught those high school girls, um, it would occasionally
happen, and by occasionally, it would fairly regularly happen
that a student would fail a paper in my
class. And they ended up being OK with that.
Their parents did not, um, because I was trying
to provide education and not just success. But I
wanted students to be accountable for screwing up a
paper. I can look back on my own life
and think about the ways that I have failed
a paper, and we need to be able to
fail a paper without failing as a person. And
so, I think that accountability is really essential for
intellectual joy. So, all these different components, um, I
think are really crucial to intellectual joy, and these
are things that we can do something about. So,
for example, if we take the elements of adoration,
which is the 7th A, and by the way,
no one likes this A really except me, but
adoration as a requirement of intellectual joy comes from
the Latin a adorare, which means to call to
someone held in high esteem. So, I think about
adoration as the little unglamorous, unsexy ways that we
recognize the inherent dignity of other people on a
regular basis. I think this is also required for
intellectual joy. If you're not feeling valued or seen,
it's hard to feel that kind of joy, that
satisfaction, that calm, that peace that comes with expanding
as a person.
Yeah, I, I mean, two things I wanted to
say about that. I mean, first of all, when
you mentioned, for example, toxic positivity, it reminded me
of the Uh, phenomenon of emotional labor that many
people do not even know about because I mean,
for example, this is even more, uh, I mean
severe I guess when the, when people work in
customer service and or when they have to deal
directly with customers in any way because I mean
sometimes you just might. If you like crap, but
you still have to be amicable and polite and
patient and all of that. And I mean, that
takes a toll many times on people and uh
I mean, sometimes it's one of the reasons why
people get burnt out because they have to do
that on a daily basis even if they. Feel
really, really, really bad and depressed and all of
that, and they don't really want to smile, but
they are forced to smile, otherwise they will get
fired or something like that. So that's one thing.
And then the other thing was that, I mean,
when you were talking about feedback. That sort of
corporate talk, I mean, it really pisses me off
because sometimes it's like, can't you just talk like
a normal person? Can't you just use like normal
language? And I mean if you're going to For
example, if you're going to fire me, why is
it that you're faking empathy and you're faking that
you care about my future when it's obvious that
you don't give a crap about my future? I
mean, just, just be honest. And authentic and say
what you what you want to say because I
mean people don't, people from human resources many times
because they are like, I mean indoctrinated into that
kind of corporate talk and all of that and
that kind of approach to employees and all of
that and corporate environment and and that kind of
thing. They, they think that oh. If we just
say that we care about him or her, then
he or she will feel better after they get
fired. And many times people even feel worse because
of that, and they post, they post videos on
the internet before they're called up to a meeting
on Zoom because they are already suspecting that something
like that that they're going to get fired or
something like that, and then They get even angrier
because people are not honest.
Yes, and that honesty is a relational process that
has to happen over time. And I would just
hazard a guess, because I know those videos that
you're talking about as well, but I, I would
hazard a guess that people who are posting videos
in advance of being fired already are experiencing a
bad situation at work, and that's why they're posting
those videos, because there's not that trustworthiness or that
value, um, that they've experienced over time, you know,
and a lot of what we're talking about, is
doing the non-glamorous work of showing up, cultivating those
authentic relationships, being mindful, and so on. And in
fact, when I was talking with a couple of
different Classes of executive MBA students, they took this
work on intellectual joy, and some of them for
the first time were having conversations with people on
their team that they'd never had before, right? And
it brought them closer together as a team. So
you can wield something like this as an element
or tool of power or a way to be
inauthentic, but that is certainly not the intention. But
you're also making me think about a statistic that,
Um, says that 85% of CEOs and leaders in
organizations feel like they live their purpose and mission
on a daily basis at work, whereas 85% of
everyone else does not feel that way. And so,
we should be thinking about this, you know, of
course, it's good to be king or queen. If
you're at the top and you're the one establishing
the vision and you're saying what's what, of course,
you're walking tall for the most part, even if
you have a lot of pressure, and you feel
a sense of purpose, but everyone else is kind
of subjected to that. When in reality, as the
Pew and Gallup research polls show, what 97% of
younger people want is some kind of purpose and
meaning and joy in their work. And so, we
have this major gap here, and it's not going
to be that, you know, leaders will just suddenly
be able to make everyone happy at work. And
in fact, There's an argument saying that that shouldn't
even be an organization's concern. But the reality is
that the nature of work itself has changed, starting
in the middle of the 20th century, so that
younger people, especially people who are going to college,
they do want some kind of identity maker at
work. They do want a challenge. It's not that
they're afraid of a challenge, and they are thinking
about purpose and meaning. So how can organizations help
bring this together so that we don't find ourselves
making angry videos in advance of probably being fired,
right? As, as funny as they are, how can
we not harm ourselves and each other in that
way?
Uh, YEAH, actually, I don't find them funny. I,
I get angry and because I feel empathy for
those people that are getting fired and treated like
that. Uh, BUT anyway, anyway, it's, it's, it's a
sort of Let's say anthropological work watching those videos
for sure and I'll, and so to co-sign that,
and I didn't mean to say that you were
finding it funny and I'm very sorry about that.
Oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
but in the, in the same sort of way
I do. I have a lot of sympathy for
people who post kind of reject rejections from job
applications too, where they've gone through, you know, 4
rounds of interviews, they've had to take a week
out of their own job to go provide a
free service for this other place, only to be
fired. It is too much. And I guess, um,
you know, So, maybe we could both agree that
we can, we can, in fact, do better than
this. As people in our corners of the world,
wherever we may be, we can, in fact, do
better than this. I think there's a great deal
to be hopeful for in those ways, um, by
being able to name these situations, by being able
to find like motivated people, and to realize, essentially,
three things at base. First, we need to grow.
Just as people, we need to grow. And kind
of necrophilic ways of firing people, this nourishment of
death, this is not going to fly. We need
to grow. Through all our jobs, through all our
experiences, we are growing anyhow. So, how can we
affirm that? Second, I'd say that, um, most of
us tend to move in cycles. And so, by
this, I mean, for me, every 5 years, I,
as I look back through my life, every 5
years, I start to get a little itchy, and
I start to need to have a new idea
or a new project. For some people, it's 6
months, for some people, it's every year. But I'd
say that one thing we could pay attention to
is, is our own kind of cycle of when
we feel like we need that intellectual joy or
we need a new project. And I think you
probably satisfy this in your podcast quite frequently. I
listen to a lot of your episodes, and they're
constantly life-giving. And then 3 is a point we've
already talked about, which is that we burst forth
just as people who have jobs, many people, right?
So, so, for people who have jobs, we have
regular jobs, there are expectations, but we also burst
forth. And I think about Athena bursting forth from
the head of Zeus fully formed, right? And I
think about how untimely and painful that was. A
question I would have is how can we make
time for the, for the untimely in our own
lives? And so, how can we change maybe our
organizations and cultures to allow for these good ideas
to do the, do the hard work of being
born. So, you know, we need to grow, we
move in cycles, and we burst forth. I think
those are also kind of big picture existential ideas
related to intellectual joy.
Mhm. By the way, uh, I think we've already
covered for the most part the topics we decided
on for today, but it just came to mind
when we were talking about intellectual disempowerment. Would you
consider epistemic injustice a form of intellectual disempowerment, because
it came to mind that for example, when it
comes to the context of work, uh, many times
I see. That if people are suffering a form
of epistemic injustice in the way that they do
not have access to the proper epistemic tools to
empower empower themselves as workers, uh, I mean, they
are even more vulnerable to exploitation and for example,
when people learn, uh, this is just an example,
it can be done through several different kinds of
ways, but when people learn, for example, About concepts
and ideas coming from socialism, Marxism, communism. I mean,
they suddenly get the proper epistemic tools, intellectual tools
to empower themselves as workers. I mean, in that
particular case, if we're talking about socialism, communism, it's
usually in a more collective way, but of course
I think that you would agree that Even for
the other cases, I mean, when it comes to
experiencing intellectual joy, it's not necessarily something that we
need to do just on an individual basis. We
can do it collectively and so I mean, after
saying all of that, do, do you, would you
consider epistemic injustice also a form of intellectual disempowerment?
Absolutely, 100%. And so, that's the harm that comes
when you're undermined in your capacity as a knower.
And I love Miranda Fricker's work on this. I
really, really do. And I remember when I read
her book, um, Epistemic Injustice back in like 2008,
it Immediately put a name to something, right? Um,
AND I appreciate that very much, because it makes
me think of, uh, one of my favorite theorists,
I suppose, Paulo Freiri with pedagogy of the oppressed.
And it makes me think about how, He was
exiled from Brazil because his work, which was born
of wanting to help provide literacy to adult peasants,
was seen as threatening to those in the status
quo and in positions of power. We can think
of Socrates in this way too, of course, and
the lineage is long, but absolutely, the The method
and tool to keep people from advancing is to
divide and conquer. Make sure that no one ever
learns from anyone again and that people are isolated,
then absolutely, just reinforce the status quo. But if
we encourage dialogue, if we empower through naming the
world, which then enables change, then, Then, we have
cause for resilience, resistance, and resonance. And resonance is
really what happens when the world breaks forth, and
we vibe with it, as the kids might say.
And we recognize that there's something a little bit
out of our control in that resonance, um, and
that little bit out of our control means that
something is possible. Otherwise, we're just reinforcing the status
quo. So, I 100% agree. And I think, again,
that there are just some very straightforward things that
people could do to make marginalized people's lives better,
like, much better than they would otherwise be. And
it wouldn't even be all that hard, but it
could be perceived as threatening.
Yeah, I just wanted to say just for us
to wrap up our conversation that I mean people
also have these very, even when it comes to
intellectual or intellectualism more generally, people have this sort
of very Eurocentric view and very male-centric view of
things where, oh my God, if it wasn't for
the Greeks we wouldn't have any philosophy. I mean,
just go listen to Peter Adamson's, Adamson's, uh, podcast
History of philosophy without any gaps, and we, we
would, we would very much have philosophy because there
was philosophy in India, China, Japan, I mean, the
Middle East, Africa, and so on and so forth.
So, uh, but also, I mean that idea that
if it wasn't for, uh, Particular men doing philosophy
or doing intellectual work, we, we would, uh, we
wouldn't have philosophy, science, and all the other disciplines.
I, I mean, I, I sometimes when people say
that I, I just, uh, reply, yeah, don't, don't
worry, don't freak out. If we didn't have if
we didn't have Plato, we would have Ipatia, so.
Yeah, and Aspasia and a whole bunch of other
people who, um, we've just managed to forget about
because we never cared to look where they happen
to be living and writing, um, for sure. I
mean, that's why the end of Virginia Woolf's book,
A Room of One's Own is always so beautiful.
And it, it brings a tear to the eye.
I actually gave away my copy of this book
to someone the other day, but She says, um,
did you know that Shakespeare had a sister, right?
It's this kind of famous concluding line, but she
was busy doing all these other things that women
did, and we never cared to, to look for
her. But I'd like to think that she's still
living now in our time, you know, and, and
this work on intellectual joy, it's about work, it's
about life, it's about education, and My hope is
that it continues to resonate. My other hope is
that I actually finish these books I'm working on
and that maybe we can do another, uh, follow-up
conversation because you're always a wonderful interlocutor. So thank
you.
Yeah, thank you so much. And by the way,
uh, would you like to tell people, uh, where
they can find you and your work on the
internet and do you already have any rough idea
about when your next book is going to get
published?
So, my hope is that this book on intellectual,
the power of intellectual joy for women at work,
um, will be out in about a year, but
I am still about 2/3 of the way through
writing it. My work that I completed in 2023
is available freely online, along with a workbook on
advancing the seven A's for intellectual joy. And I
have a TEDx talk that I gave a few
years ago in the COVID times, um, so the
audio is actually terrible, but I, I do like
the talk, and that's called Women and Intellectual Empowerment.
So, thank you for asking.
Yeah, sure, I will be leaving links to all
of that in the description of the interview, and
Dr. Xu, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been very
fun and stimulating to talk with you, and I
hope to have you on when your upcoming book
is out or about to get published.
So I would welcome that. Thank you so much.
Have a great rest of your day. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.